Ensemble-Conditioned Molecular Design
Ross Irwin1,2†
Alessandro Tibo1
Jon Paul Janet1
Simon Olsson2
1 Molecular AI
Discovery Sciences, R&D
AstraZeneca
Gothenburg, Sweden
2 Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Chalmers University of Technology
and University of Gothenburg
Gothenburg, Sweden
Molecular design is typically approached as a problem of finding molecules which can
adopt a single bioactive conformation. In reality, molecules occupy a distribution
over conformations, and many of the properties which determine whether a candidate
is viable depend on that distribution rather than on any single conformer. We
reframe molecular design as an optimisation of both the modes and properties of
molecules’ conformational ensembles, where modes can be represented as shapes,
pharmacophore profiles or protein pockets, and properties are aggregate scalars
computed over the whole distribution. To realise this we introduce ensemble-
conditioned guidance, a framework which conditions 3D molecular generative
models on both axes simultaneously. Mode conditions are composed adaptively at
inference by combining the vector fields produced under each condition. Conditions
may be targeted or avoided, mixed across modalities and combined in arbitrary
numbers, allowing a wide range of design tasks to be expressed with a single
trained model. We introduce adaptive symmetry learning to allow conditions from
different reference frames to be composed, and extend our generative framework to
enable flexible-size generation. We evaluate on new benchmarks for multi-mode
conditioning and ensemble property optimisation, and apply the framework to two
practical drug discovery tasks, dual-target binder design and active-state-selective
agonist design, where in both cases conditioning on the additional state improves
the desired outcome over single-state conditioning.
1
Introduction
Existing methods for computational molecular design generally consider only a single conformation
of a molecule. Docking [1] and shape-based virtual screening [2–4] both score a molecule by its best
pose against a reference, and structure-based generative models [5–11] are trained and evaluated
on the bioactive conformer alone. Similarly, ligand-based generative approaches condition on the
shape or pharmacophore profile of a reference conformer [12–14]. In reality, all molecules occupy a
distribution over conformations [15–17], the Boltzmann distribution, and many crucial molecular
properties are determined by that distribution rather than a single conformer.
Many practical drug design problems can be viewed through the lens of optimising both the modes
† Correspondence to: rossir@chalmers.se
1
arXiv:2609.15077v1  [cs.LG]  14 Sep 2026


Figure 1: Overview of the ensemble-conditioned guidance framework. A: Use-cases of our framework
visualised in terms of how they can be used to optimise modes and properties of the conformational ensemble.
B: Conditioning signals supported by our model; modes can be represented by shapes, pharmacophore profiles
or protein pockets, and properties are target scalar values. Conditioning weights {α1, . . . , αK} are assigned
to each mode condition, mi. In practice, conditions which share a reference frame can be grouped into a
single mi. C: Guided sampling with ensemble conditions, where xt refers to the partially denoised molecule,
and γ is the strength of conditioning, analagous to classifier-free guidance.
and properties of a molecule’s conformational ensemble. Agonist design requires a ligand which
stabilises the active conformation of a receptor rather than the inactive one, and selectivity requires
a molecule which binds one pocket while avoiding closely related off-targets. Dual-target design
requires the opposite, a molecule which can adopt bioactive conformations in two different pockets.
Beyond binding, oral bioavailability and membrane permeability depend on how much polar surface
the molecule exposes across its accessible conformations [18, 19], and binding affinity is closely tied
to the entropic penalty flexible molecules pay on binding [20].
Existing approaches to these problems tend to focus on one at a time, and little attention has been
paid to optimising multiple aspects of the conformational ensemble. While multi-state design has a
long history in computational protein design [21–24], recent deep learning methods [25–29] have
largely not carried over the ability to specify a state which should be avoided, with the exception of
SwitchCraft [30]. Existing work on small molecule design tends to focus narrowly on dual-target
design [31, 32], or performs a full search over chemical space based on an oracle function [33–36].
Search and optimisation approaches must be re-run for every new design, and are likely to become
increasingly inefficient as further orthogonal conditions are added to the objective. Ensemble
properties, meanwhile, are widely used to filter and to predict, but are rarely used to condition
generation. In concurrent work, DECAF [37] optimises molecules towards target values of ensemble
properties through iterative optimisation of a population of candidate molecules, although it does
not support conditioning on specific conformational states.
2


We propose to view molecular design as an optimisation over both the modes and properties of a
molecule’s conformational ensemble, and introduce ensemble-conditioned guidance as a framework
to realise it. Rather than training a model to satisfy several conditions jointly, we train on single
conditions and compose them adaptively at inference by combining the vector fields produced
under each. This side-steps the need for matched multi-mode datasets, which are scarce for any
given pair of states and would have to be re-assembled for each new design task. Our framework
provides considerable flexibility, unlocking a wide range of practical design tasks with a single model.
Conditions can be targeted or avoided, mixed across shapes, pharmacophores, pockets and ensemble
property values, and combined in arbitrary numbers. Fig. 1 provides an overview of our framework.
Composing conditions which sit in separate reference frames requires care, since combining equivariant
features across frames can degrade generation. We introduce adaptive symmetry learning, where
encoders are trained to produce either invariant or equivariant features, so that one condition can
define the generation frame while all others are encoded invariantly and composed without disturbing
it. Separately, existing diffusion and flow models require the number of atoms to be fixed before
generation. Recent work has begun to lift this restriction [38, 39], but not for pocket-conditioned
generation, where the choice of size matters more. We introduce a simple method for generating
molecules of variable size, and apply it in both single- and multi-condition settings.
Our core contributions are as follows:
• Ensemble-conditioned guidance, allowing 3D molecular generators to be conditioned on
arbitrary combinations of ensemble modes and properties at inference time.
• Adaptive symmetry learning, which allows conditioning signals to be composed without
breaking the generation reference frame.
• A novel encoder-decoder architecture which encodes each condition once and supports
generation of flexibly-sized molecules, keeping the cost of multi-condition sampling low.
• A suite of benchmarks for multi-mode conditioning and ensemble property optimisation,
for which little prior evaluation exists.
• Two case studies on practical drug discovery tasks: dual-target binder design and
active-state-selective agonist design.
2
Background
2.1
Flow Matching Generative Modelling
Continuous Data
Flow matching [40–42] learns a time-dependent vector field vθ(xt, t) that trans-
ports a simple prior p0 to the data distribution p1 as t progresses from 0 to 1. Conditioning on a
data endpoint x1 ∼p1 and a prior sample x0 ∼p0, training regresses vθ against a conditional target
ut(xt | x1), where xt is fixed by a chosen interpolant. Under the commonly used linear interpolant
xt = (1 −t) x0 + t x1, this target reduces to ut = x1 −x0. For molecular generative models it is
common [43, 44] to instead parameterise the network directly as a denoiser, predicting the endpoint
ˆx1 = ˆxθ(xt, t), in which case the loss takes the form
LCFM = Et,x0,x1 ∥ˆxθ(xt, t) −x1∥2
(1)
with t ∼U(0, 1), and the velocity field is recovered at inference as vθ(xt, t) = ˆx1−xt
1−t . We adopt
this endpoint parameterisation throughout. Samples are drawn by sampling a prior x0 ∼p0 and
integrating the learned vector field from t = 0 to t = 1.
3


Discrete Flow Matching For categorical variables z ∈{1, . . . , S}d we follow Campbell et al.
[45], where the generative process is a continuous-time Markov chain (CTMC) over the discrete
state space. Each dimension’s conditional probability path interpolates linearly on the simplex,
pt(z | z1) = (1 −t) p0(z) + t δz,z1, where δz,z1 is the Kronecker delta. As above, the model is
parameterised as an endpoint predictor pθ(z1 | zt, t), trained with the cross-entropy loss
LDFM = −Et,z0,z1 log pθ(z1 | zt, t)
(2)
Since we use a uniform prior in this work, the inference-time transition rate from zt to any state
y̸ = zt takes the closed form Rt(zt, y) = pθ(y|zt,t)
1−t
. Similarly to continuous flow matching, samples
are drawn by sampling z0 ∼p0 and simulating the CTMC with Euler steps
zt+∆t ∼Cat
 δzt,y + Rt(zt, y) ∆t

(3)
from t = 0 to t = 1, where y ranges over states. In practice, we apply additional stochasticity to
this rate matrix at sample time, following Campbell et al. [45].
2.2
Guidance for Generative Flows
Continuous Guidance Inference-time conditioning for diffusion and flow models is commonly
performed using guidance. Classifier guidance [46] steers a continuous-time diffusion model towards
a target conditioning c by adding the gradient of the log-probability of an existing classifier
pϕ(c | xt, t) to the model’s score estimate, with a strength parameter controlling the contribution of
the classifier. Classifier-free guidance (CFG) [47] extends this to training a single model to learn
both the conditional and unconditional distributions by randomly replacing the conditioning with
a null embedding ∅during training. At inference, the conditional and unconditional outputs are
linearly combined to bias the generative process. As shown in Zheng et al. [48], the guided velocity
field of a continuous flow matching model can be written as
vγ(xt, t, c) = (1 −γ) vθ(xt, t, ∅) + γ vθ(xt, t, c)
(4)
where γ is the guidance strength. γ = 0 recovers the unconditional flow, γ = 1 the conditional flow,
and γ > 1 amplifies the conditioning signal, which has been found to improve sample quality at the
cost of diversity.
Under the endpoint parameterisation used in this work, this is equivalent to combining the conditional
and unconditional endpoint predictions with the same weights and recovering the guided velocity as
in the unguided case, since vθ is affine in ˆxθ and the weights sum to one.
Discrete Guidance
For discrete flow matching, both classifier and classifier-free guidance have been
extended to act on rate-matrices [49]. In this work we focus on classifier-free guidance, where, given
conditioning input c, and for y̸ = xt, the guided rate combines the conditional and unconditional
rates multiplicatively:
Rγ
t (zt, y | c) = Rt(zt, y | c)γ Rt(zt, y | ∅)1−γ
(5)
Importantly, under our endpoint parameterisation, the rate is proportional to the endpoint prediction,
Rt ∝pθ. The multiplicative structure of Eq. 5 therefore carries over to the endpoint predictions,
Rγ
t ∝pθ(· | c)γpθ(· | ∅)1−γ. As in the continuous case, both then take the form of a weighted
combination of the model’s endpoint predictions, with weights (1 −γ, γ) summing to one. We
exploit this common structure in Section 3.4 to extend single-condition guidance to combinations
over multiple conditioning signals.
4


3
Ensemble-Conditioned Guidance
We characterise a molecule’s conformational ensemble along two axes. Ensemble modes are regions
of low energy in the Boltzmann distribution, corresponding to specific 3D conformations, pharma-
cophore arrangements, or pocket-bound poses. Ensemble properties are aggregate scalars computed
over the distribution, such as mean polar surface area or mean pairwise RMSD. Here, we introduce
ensemble-conditioned guidance to condition on both axes simultaneously, and compose signals for
multiple ensemble modes at inference time. A single trained model can therefore target one or more
modes while controlling a particular ensemble property, even when the objectives pull in different
directions.
Crucially, unlike previous related methods for multi-state design [25, 26, 31], this composition does
not require matched multi-mode conditions at training time, allowing us to use regular molecular
and protein-ligand datasets without constraints. Below we outline how ensemble conditions are
represented, then describe our molecular representation and model architecture, our method for
dynamic vector field composition, and finally our training setup.
3.1
Ensemble Conditions
Modes can be encoded using explicit shape and pharmacophore spatial conditions, or through a soft
protein pocket constraint, where the model is given freedom to generate the binding conformation.
Ensemble properties are encoded directly by target value, as described further below.
Shape Conditioning
Taking inspiration from Gaussian volume overlap methods for molecular shape
matching [2, 3], we represent a conformer’s shape as a noisy version of its coordinates. We first
duplicate each atomic coordinate independently with probability 0.2 (to ensure the model cannot
infer the exact atom count of the reference conformer) and then convolve each resulting point with
isotropic Gaussian noise drawn from N(0, σ2
shapeI). The subsequent noisy coordinates are then
used to condition the generative model on the given shape, where σshape controls the fidelity of the
condition. During training we sample σshape ∼U(0.1, 1.0), thereby allowing a choice of conditioning
fidelity at inference.
Pharmacophore Conditioning Pharmacophores (as well as reference protein-ligand interactions)
are similarly represented using 3D points. Our pharmacophore conditioning supports: hydrogen
bond donors and acceptors; cations and anions; aromatic rings; and hydrophobic regions. For
protein-ligand data, key binding interactions are mapped to one of these groups (full details in
Appendix B). As in ShEPhERD [14], we include a direction vector for pharmacophores, but only
for hydrogen bond donors (direction from the heavy atom to its connected hydrogen) and aromatic
rings (the normal to the ring plane); all others are set to a zero vector. Each pharmacophore is
therefore represented as a 3D coordinate, a direction vector and an interaction type. We randomly
drop out pharmacophores during training, with a dropout rate of 0.5 applied independently. A
dropout probability of 0.2 is used for protein-ligand data, where crystal interactions are known.
Pocket Conditioning As well as hard mode constraints, where the model is asked to match a
specific conformer shape or pharmacophore point cloud, our method supports soft mode conditioning
based on protein pockets. Soft conditions ask the model to generate a molecule which binds to the
given site but give the model freedom to generate its chosen binding conformation. The model is
provided with the atom types and coordinates of the pocket residues – extracted in advance at a 6Å
radius from a reference ligand.
5


Property Conditioning
Our method also supports generation conditioned on properties computed
over the conformational ensemble. While our framework in principle supports conditioning on any
function over the pre-computed ensemble, we focus on the following commonly-used heuristics:
• Polar surface area (PSA) measures the 3D surface area of polar atoms (we use nitrogen, oxygen
and any hydrogen bonded to a nitrogen or oxygen). PSA is frequently used as a heuristic to
guide orally-bioavailable and membrane-permeable drug design [18, 19]. We compute it using
RDKit’s implementation of FreeSASA for each conformer. For the remainder of this paper we
use PSA to refer to the mean PSA, averaged over the ensemble.
• Mean pairwise root-mean-squared deviation (RMSD) quantifies the flexibility of the molecule
by measuring the average RMSD between all pairs of conformers after superpositioning.
Controlling flexibility is crucial for designing potent drugs since flexible molecules pay a higher
entropic cost when binding to a target, reducing affinity. In practice, we cap the number of
pairs at 200 to avoid a runtime explosion.
To maximise inference-time flexibility, we randomly mask components of the input conditions during
training. Shape profiles, pharmacophore profiles and each property value are dropped independently,
so the model sees many combinations of conditioning signals and remains a valid predictor for any
subset chosen at inference. To create the null condition ∅for classifier-free guidance, we additionally
drop all signals jointly, including protein pockets.
3.2
Molecular Representation and Generative Process
We now outline the molecular representation used by our framework. We follow a similar setup
to the one described in Irwin et al. [44]. Notably, however, we extend their framework to enable
generation of arbitrarily-sized molecules, as described below.
Molecule Representation
A molecule is represented as a tuple (X, a, b) of heavy-atom coordinates
X ∈RN×3, atom types a ∈{1, . . . , Sa}N, and a pairwise bond matrix b ∈{1, . . . , Sb}N×N. Each
atom’s element and formal charge are bundled into a single categorical token, with a dedicated
padding token used for the fixed-size representation that enables flexible-size generation (see below).
Bonds are categorical over bond order and aromaticity, with a no-bond category for non-bonded
atom pairs. Hydrogen atoms are not modelled explicitly, but instead added after the sampled
molecule is converted to RDKit.
Joint Continuous-Discrete Flow Matching We treat the tuple x = (X, a, b) as a single data
sample, modelling coordinates with continuous flow matching (Eq. 1) and atom and bond types
with discrete flow matching (Eq. 2). The prior p0 factorises across modalities: we use a standard
Gaussian with zero centre-of-mass for coordinates, and independent uniform categoricals for each
atom and bond token. Training samples xt are constructed by drawing x0 ∼p0, x1 ∼p1, and
sampling a time t ∈[0, 1]. Coordinates are interpolated using the Gaussian-perturbed linear path
from Tong et al. [50], Xt ∼N((1 −t)X0 + tX1, σ2
xI), where σx = 0.2 Å. Atom and bond types are
interpolated independently per token using the linear categorical path discussed in Section 2.1.
We parameterise the network as a denoiser which predicts the endpoint ˆx1 = ( ˆX1, ˆa1,ˆb1), where
ˆX1 ∈RN×3 is a coordinate estimate, and ˆa1 and ˆb1 collect categorical distributions over atoms and
bonds, respectively, for each token. Combinations of endpoint predictions therefore act linearly on
the coordinates and log-linearly on the categorical distributions, which we make use of in Section 3.4.
At inference, molecules are generated by sampling x0 ∼p0 and integrating the learned velocity field
from t = 0 to t = 1 with Euler steps using the procedure outlined in Section 2.1. Following Irwin
6


Figure 2: Our model follows an encoder-decoder design, with separate encoders for shape/pharmacophore
profiles and protein pockets, as well as an ensemble property embedding module. Profile and pocket encoders
also make use of adaptive layer normalisation (not shown for brevity). Encoders follow a standard transformer
design, while the decoder mixes transformer with graph transformer layers, along with adaptive layer
normalisation conditioning for incorporating property conditions and the flow-matching time t.
et al. [44], we use a geometric decay schedule during sampling (smaller steps as t →1), which has
been found to improve sample quality. We use 100 sampling steps unless stated otherwise.
Flexible-Size Generation
Most existing diffusion and flow models for molecular generation require
the number of atoms in a molecule to be fixed in advance of generation. To support flexible-size
generation we propose to give the model a fixed number of atom tokens; padding all molecules to
a fixed maximum size (we use 48 atoms) and training the model to generate molecules including
padding atoms. Sampling simply starts from a fixed-size set of random atoms and the model assigns
padding tokens to unused atoms. We found two elements of the training setup to be critical for
learning the correct size distribution (from unconditional sampling):
1. Setting coordinates for all pad atoms as the centre-of-mass of the molecule.
2. Applying a permutation alignment between the padded versions of x0 and x1, which minimises
the total squared distance between paired prior and data atoms (after centring both point
clouds at the origin so that translations don’t dominate the cost).
Together these can be seen as an extension of equivariant optimal transport paths [51, 52] to
flexible-size generation. We hypothesise these are useful for learning the correct size distribution as
they force the model to place pad atoms close to the centre of mass of the molecule, potentially
improving the training signal. We study these decisions further in Appendix D.1.
7


3.3
Architecture
At a high-level, our model resembles an encoder-decoder neural network architecture, where ensemble
conditions (modes and scalar ensemble properties) are encoded into a stack of vectors. These are
then passed to the decoder which is trained to generate molecules satisfying the given conditions.
We use adaptive layer normalisation (AdaLN) [53] throughout, with zero-initialised output scaling
parameters, following Peebles and Xie [54]. Fig. 2 outlines our architecture.
Encoding Conditions
Shape and pharmacophore points are embedded jointly by a shared encoder;
we refer to this set as a profile. Protein pockets are embedded separately. Both encoders are
lightweight, non-equivariant transformers, embedding geometric information jointly with invariant
node features. Property values are projected through a learnable MLP and masked-summed into a
single conditioning vector, where dropped properties contribute nothing to the sum.
Generating Molecules We denote the generator as ˆxθ(xt, t, m, η), where m collects the cross-
attention conditioning signals (profile and pocket) and η refers to the property values fed through
AdaLN. These together play the role of the single conditioning input c in Section 2.2. Either
input can be replaced by a null token ∅, in which case the corresponding signal is dropped. The
decoder is a stack of blocks, each mixing transformer layers with graph transformer layers in a
3:1 ratio, balancing efficiency with expressivity while supporting both conditional generation and
pairwise bond prediction. Transformer layers cross-attend to the conditioning embeddings m; graph
transformer layers operate purely on the partially denoised graph and are used to update pairwise
features. Further details on our transformer and graph transformer layers, including our graph
latent attention mechanism adapted from SemlaFlow [44], are provided in Appendix B.2.
Adaptive Symmetry Learning
Since we wish to sample using potentially many structural conditions,
we require a robust mechanism for combining conditioning signals during inference.
In early
experiments, we found that directly combining equivariant conditioning features from different
reference frames led to degraded performance. Inspired by work on learning molecular symmetries
through augmentation [55–57], we propose to train our encoders to embed adaptive symmetries
– where we can select whether encoded features contain E(3)-invariant or -equivariant signal. To
achieve this, we randomly rotate encoder inputs out of their reference frame 50% of the time, and
pass the binary rotated flag to the encoder. We expect the model to treat the signal as invariant
when a rotation has been applied, and equivariant when it has not. In Appendix D.2 we study
how well the model learns these symmetries. In practice, we find that the symmetry error varies
significantly over the generation trajectory, but all errors converge towards zero at t = 1. This
suggests that, since generation is built on iterative denoising, encoding exact symmetries into the
model may be unimportant.
3.4
Composing Vector Fields for Multi-Mode Conditioning
To construct composite signals that target multiple modes simultaneously, or push generation away
from undesired modes, we compose mode signals adaptively at inference. In this section we outline
our method for multi-mode conditioning.
Multi-Mode Guidance The combinations of Eqs. 4 and 5 act independently on each output of
the generator: the continuous combination on the coordinate endpoint, and the discrete log-linear
combination on each categorical distribution:
ˆXγ = (1 −γ) ˆXθ(xt, t, ∅, ∅) + γ ˆXθ(xt, t, m, η)
(6)
log pγ(z1 | xt, t) = (1 −γ) log pθ(z1 | xt, t, ∅, ∅) + γ log pθ(z1 | xt, t, m, η),
z ∈{a, b}
(7)
8


Both forms share weights (1 −γ, γ) summing to one. For simplicity, we use the same weights across
coordinates, atoms and bonds throughout this paper.
This structure generalises to composition over an arbitrary number of conditioning signals. Given
conditions m1, . . . , mK and per-condition strengths γ1, . . . , γK, we define the composed endpoint
predictions as:
ˆX γ =

1 −
K
X
k=1
γk
 ˆXθ(xt, t, ∅, ∅) +
K
X
k=1
γk ˆXθ(xt, t, mk, η)
(8)
log pγ(z1 | xt, t) =

1−
K
X
k=1
γk

log pθ(z1 | xt, t, ∅, ∅)+
K
X
k=1
γk log pθ(z1 | xt, t, mk, η),
z ∈{a, b} (9)
where γ = (γ1, . . . , γK) and the null prediction absorbs the residual weight, so that the full set of
weights sums to one and the endpoint-velocity equivalence of Section 2.2 applies unchanged. Each
γk therefore keeps its single-condition meaning, the strength with which mk is applied, with γk < 0
pushing generation away from it, and K = 1 recovers Eqs. 6 and 7. More generally, Eq. 8 composes
vector fields as in compositional diffusion [58, 59] and Eq. 9 is a weighted product of experts [60],
with negative γk acting as the negation operator.
It is often convenient to separate how far the composition extrapolates from the unconditional flow
from how that extrapolation is divided between conditions. Writing γk = γαk with P
k αk = 1, the
scalar γ recovers its usual role as the overall guidance strength while α specifies the allocation across
conditions, with αk < 0 for an avoided condition. We report all experiments in this parameterisation.
Reference Frame-Guided Generation
Since it is often desirable to support frame-aware generation
(generating a protein-bound conformation, for example), we select one mk as the reference for
generation and toggle the encoder to produce equivariant features using the adaptive symmetry
mechanism of Section 3.3. All other mode conditions are encoded invariantly, which permits their
composition without breaking the reference frame. In practice, for generation efficiency, a single
condition mk may itself bundle multiple embeddings, provided they share a reference frame. For
example, profile (shape and pharmacophore) embeddings and pocket embeddings derived from
the same ligand can be concatenated as a single mk, requiring only one forward pass through the
generator.
Practical Application
Because composition is constructed entirely at inference, the model only sees
single-mode samples during training. The independent condition masking described in Section 3.1
ensures that each ˆxθ(·, ·, mk, η) remains valid under whichever subset of conditions is chosen at test
time. This form of dynamic signal composition also permits significant inference-time flexibility.
We break conditioning strategies down into the following three regimes of practical interest:
1. Mode targeting With all αk > 0, generation is steered toward a region jointly satisfying all
K modes.
2. Mode avoidance With αk < 0 for some k, generation is pushed away from mk.
3. Signal amplification With γ > 1, the combination extrapolates beyond the conditional flow,
in direct analogy to standard CFG amplification. This is independent of the choice of α and
can be combined with either regime above.
These regimes can also be combined within a single composition; for example, targeting a protein
pocket with a set of reference pharmacophores while concurrently avoiding two off-target pockets.
Algorithm 1 summarises our general sampling procedure.
9


Algorithm 1 Sampling using ensemble-conditioned guidance.
Require: Prior x0, time schedule {t0, . . . , tT }, embedded mode conditions {m1, . . . , mK}, property
embedding η, per-condition strengths γk = γαk with P
k αk = 1
1: x ←x0
2: for i = 0, . . . , T −1 do
3:
ˆx(0) ←ˆxθ(x, ti, ∅, ∅)
▷null prediction
4:
for k = 1, . . . , K do
5:
ˆx(k) ←ˆxθ(x, ti, mk, η)
▷conditional prediction
6:
end for
7:
Combine endpoint predictions using Eqs. (8) and (9) with strengths {γ1, . . . , γK}
8:
Integrate from ti to ti+1 using the procedure from Section 2.1
9: end for
10: return x
3.5
Model Training
As outlined in Section 3.2, we train the network to predict the endpoint ˆx1 = ( ˆX1, ˆa1,ˆb1) from the
interpolated sample xt. We train with the combined objective:
L = Et,x0,x1
h
ω(t) ·

∥ˆX1 −X1∥2 + λa CE(ˆa1, a1) + λb CE(ˆb1, b1)
i
,
(10)
where CE is the cross-entropy and ω(t) = min
 t
1−t, 10.0
. We use λa = 0.3 and λb = 5.0, chosen to
balance the losses for the discrete and continuous modalities.
Training samples are constructed by drawing x0 ∼p0, x1 ∼p1 and t ∼Beta(1.5, 1.0) rather
than the uniform time sampling of Eq. 1. Together with ω, this biases training towards late t,
following [44, 61]. Conditions are masked during training as described in Section 3.1. A masking
rate of 30% is applied independently to the shape profile, pharmacophore profile, PSA and pairwise
RMSD, and a global rate of 10% is applied to all signals including protein pockets.
The model is trained jointly on two datasets: GEOM Drugs [62], consisting of 300K small molecules
with conformer ensembles pre-computed using CREST [63], and SPINDR [11], a dataset of 35K
protein-ligand complexes originally derived from the PDB, with pre-computed protein-ligand
interactions. For GEOM Drugs, we hold out a test set of 1K molecules consisting of novel, unique
scaffolds (Appendix B.3), which we use to construct our multi-mode benchmark (Section 4.1).
SPINDR splits are the same as those proposed by PLINDER [64], which were chosen to minimise
train-test data leakage. During training, we filter out SPINDR systems with QED < 0.3 and
replicate the remaining 28K SPINDR systems 8 times each epoch. Training was performed in
mixed-precision (bf16) using the Adam optimiser for 200 epochs on a single A100 GPU, taking
approximately 2 days. Full hyperparameters are listed in Appendix B.2.
4
Experiments
Since there is limited existing work on designing molecules which adopt specified conformational
states or target ensemble properties, we set up a suite of challenging benchmarks to test our method.
We investigate both multi-mode generation (mode targeting and mode avoidance), and optimising
an ensemble property while maintaining a bioactive pharmacophore profile. In Section 4.3 we apply
our model to two real-world drug discovery tasks – dual-target binder design, and agonist design
(optimising for active-state selectivity).
10


Target shape
Avoid shape
γ = 0
γ = 0.5
γ = 1
γ = 2
Figure 3: Generating molecules to target an extended shape while avoiding a compact shape for different
conditioning strengths, γ, where γ = 0 refers to unconditional generation. The two reference molecules are
shown in magenta, while yellow points show the shape profiles used for conditioning. The conformer with the
highest Gaussian shape overlap to the reference is plotted, and σshape = 0.2 was used in all cases.
To keep our evaluations tractable, we set up a conformer sampling algorithm using ETKDG [65]
(implemented in RDKit), and minimisation with the MMFF94 forcefield [66]. This bypasses the
use of CREST [63], which typically takes hours per molecule, and we find it provides a reasonable
approximation for our ensemble properties (full details in Appendix C.1).
4.1
Multi-Mode Conditioning
These benchmarks aim to evaluate mode targeting and mode avoidance abilities. In order to
test fundamental capabilities, we restrict ourselves to conditioning on only two modes, which are
represented using shape profiles only (Section 3.1). Fig. 3 shows an example of molecules generated
to target an extended shape, while avoiding a compact shape, for different values of γ.
Experimental Setup We sample MMFF ensembles for all molecules in our GEOM Drugs test set
(1K molecules) using the procedure above, and select a compact and an extended conformer for
each based on the radius of gyration. We then find two complementary sets of compact-extended
pairings: mode targeting pairings, where molecules fit both modes; and mode avoiding pairings,
where molecules fit one mode but not the other. To create meaningful pairings, we ensure there
exists at least one chemically-distinct reference molecule in the training set which fits both mode
requirements, and only pair conformers whose parent molecules differ by at most one heavy atom.
The mode targeting set contains 496 pairs, while the mode avoiding set contains 535. Full details of
the benchmark construction are given in Appendix C.2.
Each molecule is scored against a target shape by sampling its MMFF ensemble, scoring every
conformer against the target via Gaussian shape overlap (using RDKit rdShapeAlign), and taking
the best conformer’s shape Tanimoto. For each target we define a size-matched virtual screening
baseline by taking the mean of this score over a random sample of training molecules within 1
heavy atom of the reference. We report the shape-matching gain ∆as the difference between the
generated tanimoto scores and the baseline for the compact and extended targets separately. ∆
therefore measures how much better a generated molecule fits the target shape than a randomly
drawn molecule of the same size.
Results
In Fig. 4 we show the density plots of compact and extended ∆when running our model
on our mode targeting and avoiding benchmarks, using values of 0.2 and 0.5 for σshape. In all
runs γ = 4.0, with α = (0.5, 0.5) for mode targeting and α = (1.5, −0.5) for mode avoidance,
11


-0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
∆ extended
σ = 0.2
σ = 0.5
-0.25
0.00
0.25
0.50
∆ compact
-0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
∆ extended
σ = 0.2
-0.25
0.00
0.25
0.50
∆ compact
σ = 0.5
-0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
σ = 0.2
σ = 0.5
-0.25
0.00
0.25
0.50
∆ compact
-0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
σ = 0.2
-0.25
0.00
0.25
0.50
∆ compact
σ = 0.5
Compact (+, equiv.) · Extended (+, inv.)
Compact (+, inv.) · Extended (+, equiv.)
Compact (+, equiv.) · Extended (−, inv.)
Compact (−, inv.) · Extended (+, equiv.)
Mode targeting
Mode avoiding
Size-matched virtual screening baseline
Target quadrant
Figure 4: Density plots showing the difference in shape Tanimoto scores compared to a size-matched baseline
on mode targeting and mode avoiding tasks. + and −correspond to mode targeting and mode avoiding
conditioning, respectively, and equiv. and inv. correspond to using equivariant and invariant conditioning
signals.
where the first entry refers to the targeted mode and the second to the avoided one. In general
we see a strong shift away from the size-matched virtual screening baseline and toward the target
condition, which is particularly prominent at lower σshape. This highlights the useful role of σshape
as controlling the conditioning fidelity; as more noise is added to the shape profile, the generated
molecule fits the target mode less strongly, although we find this leads to samples which are more
chemically distinct from the reference (see Appendix D.3). Additionally, the plots also show a
bias in conditioning strength towards the condition that was provided with equivariant features,
especially for σshape = 0.2. When targeting both modes (left hand side of Fig. 4), the dominant axis
of response shifts when the mode given equivariant features is flipped. At σshape = 0.2 the mean
compact and extended ∆are 0.19 and 0.07 when the compact mode is given equivariant features,
and 0.07 and 0.19 when the assignment is reversed, showing that the bias follows the feature type
rather than the mode.
Importantly, we also find that generation quality and chemical novelty are maintained across all
four conditioning setups. Connected validity stays above 0.97 and uniqueness above 0.99 in every
run except compact avoidance at σshape = 0.2, where it falls to 0.90. Generated molecules also
remain chemically distinct from the two reference molecules used to build the conditions, with a
mean ECFP Tanimoto of between 0.25 and 0.31 at σshape = 0.2 and 0.14 at σshape = 0.5 in all four
setups. Taking the more similar of the two references gives medians of 0.37 and 0.15 respectively, so
as well as controlling how strongly the target shape is matched, σshape trades conditioning fidelity
against chemical novelty. Full per-run results are given in Table 2.
12


Baseline
PSA 140
PSA 120
PSA 100
PSA 80
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Mean PSA  (Å2)
Mean PSA
Vina score
-14
-12
-10
-8
-6
-4
-2
0
Vina score  (kcal/mol)
Baseline
RMSD 2.5
RMSD 2.0
RMSD 1.5
RMSD 1.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
Mean pairwise RMSD  (Å)
Mean Pairwise RMSD
Vina score
-14
-12
-10
-8
-6
-4
-2
0
Vina score  (kcal/mol)
Figure 5: Distribution plots for molecular properties generated from the ensemble property optimisation
benchmark. Baseline: pocket and pharmacophore conditioning; other plots come from sampling with the
same condition as well as a property condition. Centre lines denote the mean of the distributions.
4.2
Ensemble Property Optimisation
This benchmark aims to evaluate whether ensemble properties can be controlled while a bioactive
conformation is maintained. We condition on a protein pocket together with the reference ligand’s
interactions, which fixes the binding mode, and additionally ask for a target value of a single
ensemble property, either mean PSA or mean pairwise RMSD (Section 3.1). Since one condition
constrains the bound conformation while the other constrains the whole ensemble, we measure both
the property control achieved and the cost paid in pocket fit.
Experimental Setup
We take protein-ligand systems from the test set of SPINDR, which are split
to be structurally distinct from the training systems [64]. Following the same filter used during
training, we remove any system whose reference ligand has a QED below 0.3, leaving 179 test
systems, and generate 3 molecules for each. All runs condition on the protein pocket together with
the pharmacophores extracted from the reference ligand’s crystal interactions, using γ = 2.0. Since
the pocket and its reference pharmacophores share a reference frame, they are encoded as a single
mode, so K = 1 and α = (1). Property-conditioned runs additionally provide a target for one
ensemble property, where the value given to the model is drawn from N(µtarget, σprop), with σprop
of 10 Å2 for PSA and 0.1 Å for mean pairwise RMSD. We sweep PSA targets of 80, 100, 120 and
140 Å2, and mean pairwise RMSD targets of 1.0, 1.5, 2.0 and 2.5 Å, and compare against a baseline
using the same pocket and pharmacophore conditioning with no property condition.
Generated molecules are scored for ensemble properties using the sampling procedure above, for the
fraction of reference protein-ligand interactions recovered, and by scoring each generated pose in its
pocket with AutoDock Vina [67], both as generated and after local minimisation under the Vina
scoring function. Interaction recovery measures the proportion of conditioned reference interactions
for which the generated molecule places a pharmacophore of the same type within 2Å. Since a
model could satisfy this using a highly strained conformer, we first apply a short local GFN2-xTB
relaxation on the generated pose. Full definitions of all evaluation metrics are given in Appendix C.3.
Results
As shown in Fig. 5, we find that both properties respond monotonically to the conditioning
target. Mean PSA moves from 111 to 163 Å2 as the target is raised from 80 to 140, and mean
pairwise RMSD from 1.69 to 2.17 Å as the target is raised from 1.0 to 2.5, against baseline values
13


within 1.0
within 0.5
reference
docking cutoff, relative to reference drugs (kcal/mol)
0
5
10
15
20
25
% of molecules binding both
9
1
1
7
3
0
23
10
4
donepezil only
safinamide only
both references
candidate  -12.24 kcal/mol
donepezil  -12.19 kcal/mol
candidate in AChE
candidate
donepezil
candidate  -11.85 kcal/mol
safinamide  -10.31 kcal/mol
candidate in MAO-B
candidate
safinamide
Figure 6: Dual-target binder design for AChE and MAO-B. Left: the proportion of generated molecules
which bind both pockets, at cutoffs set relative to the two reference drugs’ own docking scores (AChE
−12.19, MAO-B −10.31 kcal/mol), when conditioning on donepezil only, safinamide only, and both references.
Centre and right: the best joint candidate in its docked pose (cyan) overlaid on the crystal pose (magenta)
of donepezil in AChE and of safinamide in MAO-B. Scores are from docking both the candidate and the
reference drug into each pocket.
of 167 Å2 and 2.07 Å. Achieved values are compressed towards the baseline at the ends of each
sweep, most visibly for PSA, where a target of 80 produces a mean of 111 Å2. The model therefore
provides directional control over both properties across a wide range, rather than calibrated control
at a specific value.
Crucially, this control does not come at the cost of the pocket conditioning. Interaction recovery
stays between 0.944 and 0.961 for every run, matching the 0.954 of the pocket and pharmacophore
baseline, and Vina scores, validity and similarity to the reference ligand are all maintained across
both sweeps. Docking scores even improve slightly at lower RMSD targets, from the baseline’s
−6.18 to −6.90 kcal/mol at an RMSD target of 1.0. This is likely due to Vina’s direct penalty on
rotatable bonds and by the easier conformational search for more rigid molecules. Full results for
all runs are given in Table 3.
4.3
Real-World Case Studies
Dual-Target Binder Design
Acetylcholinesterase (AChE) inhibitors are used to treat Alzheimer’s
disease and monoamine oxidase B (MAO-B) inhibitors for Parkinson’s; MAO-B is also implicated
in Alzheimer’s pathology, and dual AChE/MAO-B inhibitors are an actively pursued therapeutic
strategy [68] and a challenging test case for multi-objective design. Here, we apply our ensemble-
conditioned guidance method to condition on the pharmacophore patterns of two reference molecules,
donepezil for AChE (PDB 4EY7 [69]) and safinamide for MAO-B (PDB 2V5Z [70]). Pharmacophores
for each reference molecule are randomly dropped out at a rate of 20% to encourage chemical diversity.
We condition on equivariant features for donepezil and invariant for safinamide, and generate 100
molecules with γ = 2.0, with α = (0.5, 0.5) over the donepezil and safinamide pharmacophore
conditions. Each reference is run on its own under the same setup as a single-target control, using
equivariant features in both cases.
We evaluate all valid, non-fragmented molecules using AutoDock Vina with exhaustiveness 32,
scoring molecules against a cutoff defined relative to the reference molecules’ own docking scores
(after redocking). We find that conditioning on both references produces the most dual-binding
molecules (according to the docking oracle) across all thresholds (Fig. 6). Within 1.0 kcal/mol of
both references, 23% of the combined molecules bind both, against 9% and 7% for donepezil and
safinamide alone. The gap widens as the cutoff tightens, to 10% against 1% and 3% within 0.5
14


-12
-10
-8
-6
active-state Vina (kcal/mol)
-13
-12
-11
-10
-9
-8
-7
-6
inactive-state Vina (kcal/mol)
NECA
ZM241385
prefers active state
baseline (active only)
-12
-10
-8
-6
active-state Vina (kcal/mol)
-13
-12
-11
-10
-9
-8
-7
-6
NECA
ZM241385
avoid inactive (6 residues)
-12
-10
-8
-6
active-state Vina (kcal/mol)
-13
-12
-11
-10
-9
-8
-7
-6
NECA
ZM241385
avoid inactive (2 residues)
baseline
6 res
2 res
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
active-state preference
¢Vinastate  (kcal/mol)
+0.47
+0.97
+1.26
Figure 7: Active-state-biased design for the A2A adenosine receptor. Left three panels: every generated
molecule placed by its docking score against the active and inactive receptor, where points above the diagonal
prefer the active state, shown for the active-pocket-only baseline and for the two CoM shift thresholds used
to build the inactive-pocket negative. NECA (agonist) and ZM241385 (antagonist) are docked through the
same pipeline as reference points. Right: mean ∆Vinastate for each run.
kcal/mol, and 4% against 1% and 0% at the reference scores themselves. The best joint candidate
matches donepezil in AChE (−12.24 against −12.19 kcal/mol) and improves on safinamide in
MAO-B (−11.85 against −10.31), overlaying the ring system of each drug in the corresponding
pocket while remaining a novel scaffold rather than a copy of either.
Agonist Design G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) switch between an active and an inactive
conformation, and only the active state signals. An agonist stabilises the active state while an
antagonist binds the same pocket without activating the protein. This makes agonist design a
problem of selectively binding the active state over the inactive, rather than maximising affinity
for a single one. Here, we take the A2A adenosine receptor as a canonical example, with PDB
5G53 [71] as the active state bound to NECA, a known agonist, and PDB 4EIY [72] as the inactive
state bound to ZM241385, a known antagonist. Pockets are first extracted by taking residues within
6Å of any atom of the reference ligands. We align the inactive pocket onto the active and encode
both with equivariant features, since the reference frames are aligned. Embedded residues with a
centre-of-mass (CoM) shift of less than a given threshold between active and inactive conformations
are discarded. We experiment with thresholds of 1.5Å and 2.0Å, which retain 6 residues and 2
residues, respectively. We generate 100 molecules per run with γ = 2.0 and α = (2.0, −1.0), and
compare against a baseline conditioned on the active pocket alone. Every molecule is docked into
both receptors, and we report ∆Vinastate = Vinainactive −Vinaactive, such that positive values refer
to active state-preferring.
Adding the inactive state avoidance signal noticeably shifts generation towards the active state
(Fig. 7). Conditioning generation on the active pocket alone is biased towards the active state, with
a mean ∆Vinastate of +0.47 kcal/mol. However, adding the inactive conformation as a negative
condition roughly doubles this, giving +0.97 for the 6-residue condition and +1.26 for the 2-residue
run. This compares to +1.61 for NECA and +0.17 for ZM241385 docked through the same pipeline.
Since both conditions are only pocket conformations rather than binding profiles, we find that the
ECFP Tanimoto to NECA stays very low throughout, with medians between 0.12 and 0.19, so the
model is able to explore novel chemical space while still producing active state-favouring molecules.
15


5
Conclusion
We proposed to approach molecular design through the modes and properties of a molecule’s
conformational ensemble, rather than through a single bioactive conformation, and introduced
ensemble-conditioned guidance as a framework for doing so. By composing conditions at inference
rather than learning them jointly, our method requires no matched multi-mode training data,
and allows shapes, pharmacophores, pockets and ensemble properties to be combined in arbitrary
numbers, targeted or avoided, with a single trained model. On our multi-mode benchmarks we find
a clear shift towards the target shape relative to a size-matched virtual screening baseline, in both
the targeting and avoidance settings, without any loss of generation quality or chemical novelty.
Ensemble properties respond monotonically to the conditioning target while the conditioned binding
mode is retained, showing that the two axes can be controlled concurrently even when they constrain
the molecule differently. Two case studies apply the framework to practical drug design problems:
for dual-target binder design, conditioning on both references substantially improves the proportion
of molecules scoring well against both pockets, and for agonist design, adding the inactive receptor
conformation as a negative condition more than doubles the active-state preference of generated
molecules.
Limitations
On the method, conditions encoded with invariant features show a weaker conditioning
signal than the condition which defines the generation frame, so the assignment of the reference
frame remains a meaningful choice at inference. Additionally, inference time scales linearly with the
number of mode conditions since each requires its own forward pass through the generator. Property
conditioning provides directional rather than calibrated control, with achieved values compressed
towards the unconditioned baseline at the ends of each sweep.
On the evaluation, we rely on an approximate ensemble sampling procedure to keep our benchmarks
tractable, so we cannot guarantee that generated molecules fit the desired shapes at CREST
ensemble quality, and our mean PSA and mean pairwise RMSD values only approximate the CREST
observables the model was trained on. CREST itself produces conformer ensembles rather than
samples from a thermalized distribution, so we characterise our conditions and properties in terms
of the conformational ensemble rather than making distributional claims about it. Finally, our case
studies use docking scores as an oracle for binding, which is a coarse proxy and cannot distinguish
designs which would succeed experimentally from those which merely score well.
Future Work
A natural extension of our framework is to chameleonicity, the ability of a molecule
to adopt distinct conformational states in different environments, which has been suggested as a
route to designing orally bioavailable PROTACs, macrocycles and peptides [73, 74]. Chameleonic
constraints can be expressed directly as a combination of mode and property conditions, making
our framework a very suitable choice, although this would require extending the maximum size of
molecules beyond 48 heavy atoms.
On the methodological side, we are interested in better ways of combining vector fields, either
allowing equivariant fields to be composed directly or pushing a stronger signal into the invariant
features. Investigating other composition methods [75, 76] and sequential Monte Carlo approaches
targeting the desired multi-modal distribution [77, 78] are natural candidates. Scaling up protein-
ligand data with synthetic datasets would allow a wider range of pocket conditions to be learned.
Validating the framework on a larger number of simultaneous reference frames would also test the
generality of the composition beyond the two-mode setting studied here.
16


Acknowledgements
We thank Selma Moqvist and the rest of the Olsson group and Molecular AI department for helpful
input on the work. We also thank Kento Abeywardane and Kenji Walker for valuable discussions.
This work was partially supported by the Wallenberg AI, Autonomous Systems and Software
Program (WASP) funded by the Knut and Alice Wallenberg Foundation. Computational resources
were provided by the National Academic Infrastructure for Supercomputing in Sweden (NAISS),
funded by the Swedish Research Council. Computational resources were also provided on the
Berzelius system funded by the Knut and Alice Wallenberg foundation and operated by NAISS.
References
[1] Irwin D Kuntz, Jeffrey M Blaney, Stuart J Oatley, Robert Langridge, and Thomas E Ferrin. A
geometric approach to macromolecule-ligand interactions. Journal of molecular biology, 161(2):
269–288, 1982.
[2] J Andrew Grant and BT Pickup. A gaussian description of molecular shape. The Journal of
Physical Chemistry, 99(11):3503–3510, 1995.
[3] J Andrew Grant, Maria A Gallardo, and Barry T Pickup. A fast method of molecular shape
comparison: A simple application of a gaussian description of molecular shape. Journal of
computational chemistry, 17(14):1653–1666, 1996.
[4] Thomas S Rush, J Andrew Grant, Lidia Mosyak, and Anthony Nicholls. A shape-based 3-d
scaffold hopping method and its application to a bacterial protein- protein interaction. Journal
of medicinal chemistry, 48(5):1489–1495, 2005.
[5] Xingang Peng, Shitong Luo, Jiaqi Guan, Qi Xie, Jian Peng, and Jianzhu Ma. Pocket2mol:
Efficient molecular sampling based on 3d protein pockets. In International conference on
machine learning, pages 17644–17655. PMLR, 2022.
[6] Shitong Luo, Jiaqi Guan, Jianzhu Ma, and Jian Peng. A 3d generative model for structure-based
drug design. Advances in neural information processing systems, 34:6229–6239, 2021.
[7] Jiaqi Guan, Wesley Wei Qian, Xingang Peng, Yufeng Su, Jian Peng, and Jianzhu Ma.
3d equivariant diffusion for target-aware molecule generation and affinity prediction.
In
The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.
URL https:
//openreview.net/forum?id=kJqXEPXMsE0.
[8] Arne Schneuing, Charles Harris, Yuanqi Du, Kieran Didi, Arian Jamasb, Ilia Igashov, Weitao
Du, Carla Gomes, Tom L Blundell, Pietro Lio, et al.
Structure-based drug design with
equivariant diffusion models. Nature Computational Science, 4(12):899–909, 2024.
[9] Julian Cremer, Tuan Le, Frank Noé, Djork-Arné Clevert, and Kristof T Schütt. Pilot: equivari-
ant diffusion for pocket-conditioned de novo ligand generation with multi-objective guidance
via importance sampling. Chemical Science, 15(36):14954–14967, 2024.
[10] Arne Schneuing, Ilia Igashov, Adrian W. Dobbelstein, Thomas Castiglione, Michael M.
Bronstein, and Bruno Correia.
Multi-domain distribution learning for de novo drug de-
sign. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2025. URL
https://openreview.net/forum?id=g3VCIM94ke.
[11] Julian Cremer, Ross Irwin, Alessandro Tibo, Jon Paul Janet, Simon Olsson, and Djork-Arné
17


Clevert. Flowr: Flow matching for structure-aware de novo, interaction-and fragment-based
ligand generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.10564, 2025.
[12] Keir Adams and Connor W. Coley. Equivariant shape-conditioned generation of 3d molecules
for ligand-based drug design. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Represen-
tations, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=4MbGnp4iPQ.
[13] Ziqi Chen, Bo Peng, Srinivasan Parthasarathy, and Xia Ning. Shape-conditioned 3d molecule
generation via equivariant diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.11890, 2023.
[14] Keir Adams, Kento Abeywardane, Jenna Fromer, and Connor W. Coley. ShEPhERD: Diffusing
shape, electrostatics, and pharmacophores for bioisosteric drug design. In The Thirteenth
International Conference on Learning Representations, 2025. URL https://openreview.net/
forum?id=KSLkFYHlYg.
[15] Marc C Nicklaus, Shaomeng Wang, John S Driscoll, and George WA Milne. Conformational
changes of small molecules binding to proteins. Bioorganic & medicinal chemistry, 3(4):411–428,
1995.
[16] Jonas Boström, Per-Ola Norrby, and Tommy Liljefors. Conformational energy penalties of
protein-bound ligands. Journal of computer-aided molecular design, 12(4):383–383, 1998.
[17] Emanuele Perola and Paul S Charifson. Conformational analysis of drug-like molecules bound
to proteins: an extensive study of ligand reorganization upon binding. Journal of medicinal
chemistry, 47(10):2499–2510, 2004.
[18] Daniel F Veber, Stephen R Johnson, Hung-Yuan Cheng, Brian R Smith, Keith W Ward,
and Kenneth D Kopple. Molecular properties that influence the oral bioavailability of drug
candidates. Journal of medicinal chemistry, 45(12):2615–2623, 2002.
[19] Jing J Lu, Kimberly Crimin, Jay T Goodwin, Patrizia Crivori, Christian Orrenius, Li Xing,
Peter J Tandler, Thomas J Vidmar, Benny M Amore, Alan GE Wilson, et al. Influence of
molecular flexibility and polar surface area metrics on oral bioavailability in the rat. Journal of
medicinal chemistry, 47(24):6104–6107, 2004.
[20] Chia-en A Chang, Wei Chen, and Michael K Gilson. Ligand configurational entropy and protein
binding. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 104(5):1534–1539, 2007.
[21] James J Havranek and Pehr B Harbury. Automated design of specificity in molecular recognition.
nature structural biology, 10(1):45–52, 2003.
[22] Xavier I Ambroggio and Brian Kuhlman. Computational design of a single amino acid sequence
that can switch between two distinct protein folds. Journal of the American Chemical Society,
128(4):1154–1161, 2006.
[23] Andrew Leaver-Fay, Ron Jacak, P Benjamin Stranges, and Brian Kuhlman. A generic program
for multistate protein design. PloS one, 6(7):e20937, 2011.
[24] James A Davey and Roberto A Chica. Multistate approaches in computational protein design.
Protein Science, 21(9):1241–1252, 2012.
[25] Alex Abrudan, Sebastian Pujalte Ojeda, Chaitanya K. Joshi, Matthew Greenig, Felipe Engel-
berger, Alena Khmelinskaia, Jens Meiler, Michele Vendruscolo, and Tuomas Knowles. Multi-
state protein sequence design with dynamicMPNN. In The Fourteenth International Conference
on Learning Representations, 2026. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=4ptHfbHG3D.
18


[26] Chaitanya Joshi, Arian Jamasb, Ramon Viñas, Charles Harris, Simon Mathis, Alex Morehead,
Rishabh Anand, and Pietro Liò. grnade: Geometric deep learning for 3d rna inverse design. In
International Conference on Learning Representations, volume 2025, pages 10166–10191, 2025.
[27] Bowen Jing, Anna Sappington, Mihir Bafna, Ravi Shah, Adrina Tang, Rohith Krishna, Adam
Klivans, Daniel J. Diaz, and Bonnie Berger. Generating functional and multistate proteins
with a multimodal diffusion transformer. bioRxiv, 2025. doi: 10.1101/2025.09.03.672144. URL
https://www.biorxiv.org/content/early/2025/09/04/2025.09.03.672144.
[28] Sidney Lyayuga Lisanza, Jacob Merle Gershon, Samuel WK Tipps, Jeremiah Nelson Sims,
Lucas Arnoldt, Samuel J Hendel, Miriam K Simma, Ge Liu, Muna Yase, Hongwei Wu, et al.
Multistate and functional protein design using rosettafold sequence space diffusion. Nature
biotechnology, 43(8):1288–1298, 2025.
[29] Richard W. Shuai, Tianyu Lu, Subhang Bhatti, Petr Kouba, and Po-Ssu Huang. Ensemble-
conditioned protein sequence design with caliby. bioRxiv, 2025. doi: 10.1101/2025.09.30.679633.
URL https://www.biorxiv.org/content/early/2025/10/05/2025.09.30.679633.
[30] Bowen Jing, Mihir Bafna, Anisha Parsan, Heyuan Michael Ni, David Kwabi-Addo, Bryan D.
Bryson, Adam Klivans, and Bonnie Berger. Switchcraft: A programmatic framework for
designing state-switching proteins. In Forty-third International Conference on Machine Learning,
2026. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=YtqaHnqv8c.
[31] Jianliang Wu, Anjie Qiao, Zhen Wang, Zhewei Wei, and Sheng Chen. Fusediff: Symmetry-
preserving joint diffusion for dual-target structure-based drug design.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2603.05567, 2026.
[32] Xiangxin Zhou, Jiaqi Guan, Yijia Zhang, Xingang Peng, Liang Wang, and Jianzhu Ma.
Reprogramming pretrained target-specific diffusion models for dual-target drug design. In
The Thirty-eighth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2024. URL
https://openreview.net/forum?id=Y79L45D5ts.
[33] Yanheng Li, Xiaohan Lin, Yize Hao, Jun Zhang, Yundong Wu, and Yi Qin Gao. Molsculptor:
an adaptive diffusion-evolution framework enabling generative drug design for multi-target
affinity and selectivity.
ChemRxiv, 2025.
doi: 10.26434/chemrxiv-2025-v4758-v2.
URL
https://chemrxiv.org/doi/abs/10.26434/chemrxiv-2025-v4758-v2.
[34] Viet Thanh Duy Nguyen, Phuc Pham, and Truong-Son Hy.
Enabling multi-target drug
discovery through latent evolutionary optimization and synthesis-aware prioritization (evosynth).
Communications Chemistry, 2026.
[35] Thibaud Southiratn, Bonil Koo, Yijingxiu Lu, and Sun Kim. Combimots: Combinatorial
multi-objective tree search for dual-target molecule generation. In International Conference on
Machine Learning, pages 56650–56691. PMLR, 2025.
[36] Laura Landolfi, Bruno Catalanotti, and Jon Paul Janet. Finding balance: Multiobjective
optimization in molecular generative modeling. Journal of Chemical Information and Modeling,
2026.
[37] Selma Moqvist, Richard Beckmann, Ross Irwin, Rocío Mercado, and Simon Olsson. Boltzmann-
expected molecular design with decoupled annealing flows. arXiv preprint arXiv:2607.19519,
2026.
19


[38] Ian Dunn and David R Koes. Flowmol3: flow matching for 3d de novo small-molecule generation.
Digital Discovery, 2026.
[39] Malte Franke, Stefan P Schmid, Zarko Ivkovic, Kjell Jorner, and Andreas Krause. Generative
molecular morphing for flexible-size design via unbalanced optimal transport. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2606.07239, 2026.
[40] Yaron Lipman, Ricky T. Q. Chen, Heli Ben-Hamu, Maximilian Nickel, and Matthew Le. Flow
matching for generative modeling. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning
Representations, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=PqvMRDCJT9t.
[41] Michael Samuel Albergo and Eric Vanden-Eijnden. Building normalizing flows with stochastic
interpolants. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.
URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=li7qeBbCR1t.
[42] Xingchao Liu, Chengyue Gong, and qiang liu. Flow straight and fast: Learning to generate
and transfer data with rectified flow. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning
Representations, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=XVjTT1nw5z.
[43] Tuan Le, Julian Cremer, Frank Noe, Djork-Arné Clevert, and Kristof T Schütt. Navigating
the design space of equivariant diffusion-based generative models for de novo 3d molecule
generation. In International Conference on Learning Representations, volume 2024, pages
26244–26266, 2024.
[44] Ross Irwin, Alessandro Tibo, Jon Paul Janet, and Simon Olsson. Semlaflow–efficient 3d
molecular generation with latent attention and equivariant flow matching.
In The 28th
International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, 2025.
[45] Andrew Campbell, Jason Yim, Regina Barzilay, Tom Rainforth, and Tommi Jaakkola. Gener-
ative flows on discrete state-spaces: Enabling multimodal flows with applications to protein
co-design. In Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR,
2024. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/campbell24a.html.
[46] Prafulla Dhariwal and Alexander Quinn Nichol. Diffusion models beat GANs on image synthesis.
In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021. URL https://openreview.net/
forum?id=AAWuCvzaVt.
[47] Jonathan Ho and Tim Salimans. Classifier-free diffusion guidance, 2022. URL https://arxiv.
org/abs/2207.12598.
[48] Qinqing Zheng, Matt Le, Neta Shaul, Yaron Lipman, Aditya Grover, and Ricky T. Q. Chen.
Guided flows for generative modeling and decision making, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/
abs/2311.13443.
[49] Hunter Nisonoff, Junhao Xiong, Stephan Allenspach, and Jennifer Listgarten. Unlocking
guidance for discrete state-space diffusion and flow models. In The Thirteenth International
Conference on Learning Representations, 2025. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
XsgHl54yO7.
[50] Alexander Tong, Kilian FATRAS, Nikolay Malkin, Guillaume Huguet, Yanlei Zhang, Jar-
rid Rector-Brooks, Guy Wolf, and Yoshua Bengio. Improving and generalizing flow-based
generative models with minibatch optimal transport. Transactions on Machine Learning Re-
search, 2024. ISSN 2835-8856. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=CD9Snc73AW. Expert
Certification.
20


[51] Leon Klein, Andreas Krämer, and Frank Noé. Equivariant flow matching. Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, 36:59886–59910, 2023.
[52] Yuxuan Song, Jingjing Gong, Minkai Xu, Ziyao Cao, Yanyan Lan, Stefano Ermon, Hao Zhou,
and Wei-Ying Ma. Equivariant flow matching with hybrid probability transport for 3d molecule
generation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36:549–568, 2023.
[53] Jingjing Xu, Xu Sun, Zhiyuan Zhang, Guangxiang Zhao, and Junyang Lin. Understanding and
improving layer normalization. Advances in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.
[54] William Peebles and Saining Xie. Scalable diffusion models with transformers. In Proceedings
of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), pages 4195–4205,
October 2023.
[55] Yuyang Wang, Ahmed A. A. Elhag, Navdeep Jaitly, Joshua M. Susskind, and Miguel Ángel
Bautista. Swallowing the bitter pill: Simplified scalable conformer generation. In Forty-first
International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
id=I44Em5D5xy.
[56] Eric Qu and Aditi S. Krishnapriyan.
The importance of being scalable: Improving the
speed and accuracy of neural network interatomic potentials across chemical domains. In
The Thirty-eighth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2024. URL
https://openreview.net/forum?id=Y4mBaZu4vy.
[57] Chaitanya K. Joshi, Xiang Fu, Yi-Lun Liao, Vahe Gharakhanyan, Benjamin Kurt Miller,
Anuroop Sriram, and Zachary Ward Ulissi. All-atom diffusion transformers: Unified generative
modelling of molecules and materials. In Forty-second International Conference on Machine
Learning, 2025. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=89QPmZjIhv.
[58] Yilun Du, Shuang Li, and Igor Mordatch. Compositional visual generation with energy based
models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:6637–6647, 2020.
[59] Nan Liu, Shuang Li, Yilun Du, Antonio Torralba, and Joshua B Tenenbaum. Compositional
visual generation with composable diffusion models. In European conference on computer vision,
pages 423–439. Springer, 2022.
[60] Geoffrey E Hinton. Training products of experts by minimizing contrastive divergence. Neural
computation, 14(8):1771–1800, 2002.
[61] Carlos Vonessen, Charles Harris, Miruna Cretu, and Pietro Lio. TABASCO: A fast, simplified
model for molecular generation with improved physical quality. Transactions on Machine Learn-
ing Research, 2026. ISSN 2835-8856. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=Kg6CSrbXl4.
[62] Simon Axelrod and Rafael Gomez-Bombarelli. Geom, energy-annotated molecular conformations
for property prediction and molecular generation. Scientific data, 9(1):185, 2022.
[63] Philipp Pracht, Stefan Grimme, Christoph Bannwarth, Fabian Bohle, Sebastian Ehlert, Gereon
Feldmann, Johannes Gorges, Marcel Müller, Tim Neudecker, Christoph Plett, et al. Crest—a
program for the exploration of low-energy molecular chemical space. The Journal of Chemical
Physics, 160(11), 2024.
[64] Janani Durairaj, Yusuf Adeshina, Zhonglin Cao, Xuejin Zhang, Vladas Oleinikovas, Thomas
Duignan, Zachary McClure, Xavier Robin, Gabriel Studer, Daniel Kovtun, et al. Plinder: The
protein-ligand interactions dataset and evaluation resource. BioRxiv, pages 2024–07, 2024.
21


[65] Sereina Riniker and Gregory A Landrum. Better informed distance geometry: using what we
know to improve conformation generation. Journal of chemical information and modeling, 55
(12):2562–2574, 2015.
[66] Thomas A Halgren. Merck molecular force field. i. basis, form, scope, parameterization, and
performance of mmff94. Journal of computational chemistry, 17(5-6):490–519, 1996.
[67] Oleg Trott and Arthur J Olson. Autodock vina: improving the speed and accuracy of docking
with a new scoring function, efficient optimization, and multithreading. Journal of computational
chemistry, 31(2):455–461, 2010.
[68] Dajiang Zou, Renzheng Liu, Yangjing Lv, Jianan Guo, Changjun Zhang, and Yuanyuan Xie.
Latest advances in dual inhibitors of acetylcholinesterase and monoamine oxidase b against
alzheimer’s disease. Journal of Enzyme Inhibition and Medicinal Chemistry, 38(1):2270781,
2023.
[69] Jonah Cheung, Michael J Rudolph, Fiana Burshteyn, Michael S Cassidy, Ebony N Gary, James
Love, Matthew C Franklin, and Jude J Height. Structures of human acetylcholinesterase in
complex with pharmacologically important ligands. Journal of medicinal chemistry, 55(22):
10282–10286, 2012.
[70] Claudia Binda, Jin Wang, Leonardo Pisani, Carla Caccia, Angelo Carotti, Patricia Salvati,
Dale E Edmondson, and Andrea Mattevi. Structures of human monoamine oxidase b complexes
with selective noncovalent inhibitors: safinamide and coumarin analogs. Journal of medicinal
chemistry, 50(23):5848–5852, 2007.
[71] Byron Carpenter, Rony Nehmé, Tony Warne, Andrew GW Leslie, and Christopher G Tate.
Structure of the adenosine a2a receptor bound to an engineered g protein. Nature, 536(7614):
104–107, 2016.
[72] Wei Liu, Eugene Chun, Aaron A Thompson, Pavel Chubukov, Fei Xu, Vsevolod Katritch,
Gye Won Han, Christopher B Roth, Laura H Heitman, Adriaan P IJzerman, et al. Structural
basis for allosteric regulation of gpcrs by sodium ions. Science, 337(6091):232–236, 2012.
[73] Vasanthanathan Poongavanam, Lianne HE Wieske, Stefan Peintner, Máté Erdélyi, and Jan
Kihlberg. Molecular chameleons in drug discovery. Nature Reviews Chemistry, 8(1):45–60,
2024.
[74] Matteo Rossi Sebastiano, Bradley C Doak, Maria Backlund, Vasanthanathan Poongavanam,
Björn Over, Giuseppe Ermondi, Giulia Caron, Pär Matsson, and Jan Kihlberg. Impact of
dynamically exposed polarity on permeability and solubility of chameleonic drugs beyond the
rule of 5. Journal of Medicinal Chemistry, 61(9):4189–4202, 2018.
[75] Peter Blohm and Vikas K Garg. Composition of pretrained diffusion models: A logic-based
calculus. In The Fourteenth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2026. URL
https://openreview.net/forum?id=ADLiUSC7Qm.
[76] Marta Skreta, Lazar Atanackovic, Joey Bose, Alexander Tong, and Kirill Neklyudov. The
superposition of diffusion models using the itô density estimator. In International Conference
on Learning Representations, volume 2025, pages 67004–67057, 2025.
[77] Marta Skreta, Tara Akhound-Sadegh, Viktor Ohanesian, Roberto Bondesan, Alan Aspuru-
Guzik, Arnaud Doucet, Rob Brekelmans, Alexander Tong, and Kirill Neklyudov. Feynman-kac
22


correctors in diffusion: Annealing, guidance, and product of experts. In International Conference
on Machine Learning, pages 55906–55949. PMLR, 2025.
[78] Konstantin Mark, Leonard Galustian, Maximilian P-P Kovar, and Esther Heid. Feynman-
kac-flow: Inference steering of conditional flow matching to an energy-tilted posterior. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2509.01543, 2025.
[79] Charles Harris, Kieran Didi, Arian R Jamasb, Chaitanya K Joshi, Simon V Mathis, Pietro
Lio, and Tom Blundell. Benchmarking generated poses: How rational is structure-based drug
design with generative models? arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.07413, 2023.
[80] Benoit Baillif, Jason Cole, Patrick McCabe, and Andreas Bender. Benchmarking structure-
based three-dimensional molecular generative models using genbench3d: ligand conformation
quality matters. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.04424, 2024.
[81] Julian Cremer, Tuan Le, Mohammad M Ghahremanpour, Emilia Sługocka, Filipe Menezes,
and Djork-Arné Clevert. Flowr. root–a flow matching-based foundation model for joint multi-
purpose structure-aware 3d ligand generation and affinity prediction. Nature Communications,
17(1):5883, 2026.
[82] Kunyu Wang, Helen Lai, Ross Irwin, Jon Paul Janet, and Alessandro Tibo. Assessing the factors
influencing the quality of pocket-conditioned 3d generative models. Journal of Cheminformatics,
18(1):82, 2026.
[83] Riccardo Tedoldi, Ola Engkvist, Patrick Bryant, Hossein Azizpour, Jon Paul Janet, and
Alessandro Tibo. Flexiflow: decomposable flow matching for generation of flexible molecular
ensemble. In Forty-third International Conference on Machine Learning, 2026. URL https:
//openreview.net/forum?id=iL4Uo9HeXc.
[84] Bohao Li, Xinyu Wu, Yu Cao, Jie Lin, Jingpeng Zhong, Hua Chen, Yongzhi Lu, Miru Tang,
Jinping Lei, Ting Ran, et al. De novo molecular design via shape-constrained diffusion models.
Journal of Chemical Information and Modeling, 2026.
[85] Laura Isigkeit, Tim Hörmann, Espen Schallmayer, Katharina Scholz, Felix F Lillich, Jo-
hanna HM Ehrler, Benedikt Hufnagel, Jasmin Büchner, Julian A Marschner, Jörg Pabel, et al.
Automated design of multi-target ligands by generative deep learning. Nature Communications,
15(1):7946, 2024.
[86] Brenton P Munson, Michael Chen, Audrey Bogosian, Jason F Kreisberg, Katherine Licon,
Ruben Abagyan, Brent M Kuenzi, and Trey Ideker.
De novo generation of multi-target
compounds using deep generative chemistry. Nature Communications, 15(1):3636, 2024.
[87] Hanqun Cao, Zachary Quinn, Aastha Pal, Sumi Kimura, Jingjie Zhang, Pheng Ann Heng, and
Pranam Chatterjee. Allogen: Conformation-selective binder generation with differential state
scoring. arXiv preprint arXiv:2606.05474, 2026.
[88] Francesco Alesiani, Jonathan H Warrell, Tanja Bien, Henrik Christiansen, Matheus Ferraz, and
Mathias Niepert. Logical guidance for the exact composition of diffusion models. In Forty-third
International Conference on Machine Learning, 2026. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
id=OAM1jJsMGp.
[89] Yilun Du, Conor Durkan, Robin Strudel, Joshua B Tenenbaum, Sander Dieleman, Rob Fergus,
Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Arnaud Doucet, and Will Sussman Grathwohl. Reduce, reuse, recycle:
23


Compositional generation with energy-based diffusion models and mcmc. In International
conference on machine learning, pages 8489–8510. PMLR, 2023.
[90] Vsevolod Viliuga, Leif Seute, Nicolas Wolf, Simon Wagner, Arne Elofsson, Jan Stühmer, and
Frauke Gräter. Flexibility-conditioned protein structure design with flow matching. In Forty-
second International Conference on Machine Learning, 2025. URL https://openreview.net/
forum?id=890gHX7ieS.
24


A
Additional Related Work
Since we consider this work to lie at the intersection of numerous approaches and ideas in molecular
design, we provide a thorough discussion on related strands of work in this section.
Pocket-conditioned Generation
Models which can directly generate ligands conditioned on target
protein pockets have received significant attention lately. Early approaches used either autoregressive
generation [5, 6] or diffusion generative models [7–9] but often suffered from slow sampling times
and chemically unrealistic samples [79, 80]. Later work combined flow matching with efficient
equivariant architectures to significantly improve sample time and quality [10, 11, 44, 81, 82].
Recently, FlexiFlow [83] was introduced to allow sampling multiple bound ligand conformers within
a pocket. Generating molecules of arbitrary sizes, however, remains a limitation of diffusion and
flow models, although some recent work [38, 39] has investigated allowing flexible size generation,
but these have not been extended to pocket-conditioned generation.
Shape Conditioning An orthogonal line of work to pocket conditioning has followed a similar
strategy to ligand-based virtual screening, where ligands are selected based on having high Gaussian
volume overlap with a reference binder [2, 3]. Instead of screening chemical space for potential
binders, recent work has trained generative models to design molecules with low-energy conformers
which fit the given reference shape [12, 13, 84]. ShEPhERD [14] takes this idea one step further by
allowing generation conditioned on shape, pharmacophores and electrostatics. However, all of these
approaches only consider generation based on a single reference (bound) shape profile.
Multi-target Design
Designing molecules for multiple targets is also of significant interest. Ligand-
based methods learn from compounds already associated with a target pair, either by fine-tuning
chemical language models on known dual-active ligands [85] or by reinforcement learning over an
embedded chemical space [86], and so depend on prior ligand knowledge for that pair without using
explicit structural information. Other approaches, such as MolSculptor [33] and EvoSynth [34],
optimise within the latent space of a pretrained generative model and score candidates using
3D-aware surrogates. MolSculptor in particular supports both dual-target and selectivity design.
CombiMOTS [35] instead searches combinatorially over fragments, and, like the latent optimisation
methods, does not generate directly in 3D. Structure-based methods, such as those proposed by
Zhou et al. [32], reprogram pretrained single-target diffusion models zero-shot by aligning two
pockets under a rigid transformation and composing their scores, which avoids paired training data
but assumes the two binding modes are related by a single rigid motion. FuseDiff [31] drops that
assumption by jointly generating two pocket-specific poses over a shared graph, but requires the
same ligand resolved in both pockets, which severely limits the available training data.
Multi-state Biomolecular Design
Multi-state design has a long history in computational protein
design. Havranek and Harbury [21] introduced explicit negative design into an automated design
algorithm, selecting sequences which maximise the transfer free energy from a target conformation
to a set of undesired competitor conformations, and Ambroggio and Kuhlman [22] optimised a single
sequence against multiple target structures to produce a peptide which switches fold in response
to pH or transition metals. Later work generalised this to arbitrary sets of states and scoring
terms [23]. Davey and Chica [24] surveys the algorithmic and scoring approaches developed in
this line of work. There has also been a recent surge of interest in deep learning approaches for
designing biomolecules which fit multiple states. DynamicMPNN [25] was introduced to allow the
design of proteins adopting multiple conformations, although it is limited to training on paired
conformations. ProDiT [27] proposes a method to denoise two protein structures in parallel with
a single sequence, circumventing the lack of paired training data, while ProteinGenerator [28]
25


similarly ties together diffusion trajectories with distinct structural constraints by averaging their
sequence logits. Caliby [29] and gRNAde [26], respectively, allow protein and RNA sequence design
from multiple desired conformational states. Neither supports state-avoidance, nor conditions on
properties of the ensemble as a whole. SwitchCraft [30] instead treats a frozen structure prediction
model as a differentiable loss, optimising a sequence against compositional constraints defined over
several states, but requires a separate optimisation run for each design. Recently, AlloGen [87] was
proposed as a method for designing conformationally-selective peptide binders, but focuses only on
optimising for state-selectivity.
Multi-conditional Guidance
Combining distributions multiplicatively rather than additively origi-
nates with the product of experts formalism [60], where the joint density is the normalised product
of per-expert densities and a sample is likely only if every expert assigns it high density. Du et al.
[58] applied this idea to compose independently trained energy functions over visual concepts,
including negated ones. Liu et al. [59] extended the construction to diffusion models by summing
the score estimates of pretrained conditional models, providing conjunction and negation opera-
tors. LogDiff [88] extends these to additional logical composition operators such as disjunction
and exclusive-or. Since summing scores does not sample the intended intermediate marginals,
later work adds corrector steps: MCMC transitions targeting the composed density at each noise
level [89], and sequential-Monte-Carlo reweighting for annealed, geometric-averaged, and product
distributions [77, 78].
Ensemble Property Control
Optimising properties calculated over 3D ensembles is a crucial aspect
of molecular design. Heuristics based on 3D polar surface area and molecular flexibility have long
served as a guide for improving bioavailability [18, 19], and controlling flexibility and conformational
entropy is likewise important for optimising binding affinity [20]. Despite this, relatively little existing
work addresses ensemble property optimisation in small molecule design, since most property-guided
generative models tie each property to a single generated conformer. One notable recent exception
is DECAF [37], which produces molecules with target ensemble property values through iterative
optimisation of a population of candidate molecules. Additionally, in protein design, FliPS [90]
conditions backbone generation on per-residue flexibility profiles, using a learned flexibility predictor,
although conditioning is restricted to that single property. Neither DECAF nor FliPS support
conditioning on specific conformational states.
B
Extended Methods
Here we provide full additional details on: the pharmacophore definitions we used for both ligand-only
and protein-ligand data; further details and hyperparameters for our neural network architecture;
and details on how we split our datasets into training and test subsets.
B.1
Pharmacophore Extraction
Pharmacophores and protein-ligand interactions form a core part of our model’s conditioning
information. Since we train our model on both ligand-only (GEOM Drugs) and protein-ligand
(SPINDR) data, we define separate workflows for extracting pharmacophore information but combine
them in a way that preserves conditioning information. Crucially, since high-quality protein-ligand
data is very limited, this allows us to significantly expand the diversity of pharmacophore patterns
the model sees during training.
Pharmacophores are extracted from ligand-only data using a set of SMARTS patterns. These
26


MLP
Concatenated 
Conditioning 
Embeddings
ATTENTION
ADALN
RESIDUAL
ADALN
RESIDUAL
ATTENTION BIAS 
PROJECTION
Node Features
Edge Features
Node AdaLN 
embeddings
GRAPH 
ATTENTION
MLP
Node Features
ADALN
RESIDUAL
MLP
ADALN
RESIDUAL
ADALN
ADALN
Edge Features
RESIDUAL
RESIDUAL
Node AdaLN 
embeddings
Edge AdaLN 
embeddings
Figure 8: A transformer layer (left) and graph transformer layer (right), as used in the generator.
broadly follow the patterns used by ShEPhERD. However, to help align the pharmacophores from
SMARTS with those used for protein-ligand systems, we use ShEPhERD’s SMARTS rules with the
following adaptations:
• Remove aromatic systems from the hydrophobe group. Aromatic rings get assigned an aromatic
pharmacophore tag anyway, so this information is mostly redundant.
• Remove ShEPhERD’s halogen group since different halogen atoms can provide very different
interactions. We include bromine and iodine under our hydrophobe group, and exclude chlorine
and fluorine completely.
• Exclude some of ShEPhERD’s hydrophobe SMARTS to align with ProLIF’s hydrophobe
definitions. We found that ShEPhERD’s definitions tended to generate many redundant
hydrophobe tags for chains of carbon atoms.
• Remove the zinc binder group completely since these are less relevant for drug-like molecules.
The full set of pharmacophore tags extracted from our SMARTS rules are: hydrogen bond donor,
hydrogen bond acceptor, cation, anion, aromatic, and hydrophobe.
Although the SPINDR dataset contains pre-computed protein-ligand interactions, we re-process
the systems using ProLIF for completeness. When mapping ProLIF interactions to their SMARTS
counterparts we first run the ligand-only SMARTS pharmacophore extraction logic on the ligand,
and then, for each ProLIF interaction, find its best matching SMARTS pharmacophore, dropping
any interaction that isn’t matched. Each ProLIF interaction must exactly match its corresponding
pharmacophore group tag (as provided above) based on the following mapping:
• ProLIF’s HBDonor and HBAcceptor are mapped to the hydrogen bond donor and hydrogen
bond acceptor groups, respectively.
• ProLIF’s Cationic and Anionic are mapped to cation and anion, respectively.
• ProLIF’s Hydrophobic maps to hydrophobe.
• ProLIF’s PiStacking and PiCation map to aromatic.
• ProLIF’s CationPi maps to cation.
27


Table 1: Hyperparameters for different components of the our model.
Hyperparameter
Property Encoder
Profile Encoder
Pocket Encoder
Generator
Number of layers
—
8
8
4 × 4 = 16
Hidden dimension
128
128
128
384
Edge Dimension
—
—
—
64
Attention heads
—
8
8
16
Dropout
0.0
0.1
0.1
0.1
Parameters
0.08M
2.5M
2.5M
53.5M
B.2
Architecture
This section provides the architectural details deferred from Section 3.3, including the encoder
modules and the transformer and graph transformer layers used in the generator. Figure 8 illustrates
both layer types.
Encoders
Both the profile and pocket encoders are stacks of standard (non-equivariant) transformer
layers combined with AdaLN [53]. Encoder inputs comprise the relevant point cloud features
(coordinates, types and, for the profile encoder, direction vectors). The adaptive symmetry rotated
flag described in Section 3.3, along with level of shape profile noise σshape (only for the profile
encoder), are used as conditioning for AdaLN parameters.
Decoder Transformer Layer
The decoder uses a similar transformer layer structure as the encoders,
with three alterations. First, the attention mechanism includes conditioning embeddings (of arbitrary
length), where attention queries are linear projections of the current decoder node features, while
keys and values are projections of node features concatenated with the encoded profile and pocket
embeddings (denoted m). Second, we apply an additive bias to dot-product attention scores, where
biases are linear projections of incoming pairwise features. Finally, AdaLN is conditioned on the
concatenated time embedding and property embedding η.
Graph Transformer Layer These layers do not see the encoded conditioning embeddings m,
operating only on node and edge features of the partially denoised graph (Fig. 8, right). The graph
attention module operates similarly to SemlaFlow’s latent attention [44], where node features are
first projected into lower dimensional queries and keys. Raw attention scores between a query qi
and key kj are computed using a gated outer product
aij = w⊤ (qik⊤
j ) ⊙σ(eij)

(11)
where eij are incoming edge features and σ is the sigmoid function. Feature accumulation then
proceeds in the same way as regular dot-product attention, including the use of multiple attention
heads. After graph attention, both node and edge features are updated using separate multi-layer
perceptrons (MLPs).
Hyperparameters
Table 1 lists the hyperparameters and model sizes for different parts of our model.
The total number of learnable parameters (not including EMA-updated weights) is approximately
58.6M. As outlined in Section 3.5, we train end-to-end with the Adam optimiser (learning rate 10−3,
AMSGrad, no weight decay). We use a linear warm-up of 10K steps to a constant learning rate,
gradient clipping at 1.0, and an exponential moving average of the generator weights with decay
0.999. The EMA-averaged weights are used during evaluation. Mixed-precision (bf16) is used for
both training and inference.
28


B.3
Dataset Splits
Here we describe our strategy for producing train/val/test dataset splits. For GEOM Drugs, we
opted to create a new split based on novel, unique scaffolds, to test generalisability. SPINDR splits
follow those in Cremer et al. [11].
GEOM Drugs
Data splitting proceeds by first finding all molecules with a unique Murcko scaffold
in the dataset (implemented using RDKit). From this set, we look for flexible, drug-like molecules
by applying the following filters:
1. Number of heavy atoms between 16 and 35 (inclusive).
2. Maximum CLogP (logarithm of the octanol-water partition coefficient, estimated using RDKit)
of 5.0.
3. At least 10 conformers in the pre-computed CREST ensemble.
We then randomly sample 1000 molecules from this filtered set as our test set. After removing
the test molecules from the full set, we randomly sample 10K molecules as an additional held-out
validation set, with the remaining molecules used for training.
SPINDR
The protein-ligand data uses the same train and test splits used by SPINDR [11], which
follow the splits originally proposed for the full PLINDER dataset [64]. These splits enforce strict
conditions on pocket and ligand similarity between train and test data, including dropping some
systems from train and test data to ensure a similarity gap. Full details can be found in Durairaj
et al. [64]. We remove any system where the reference ligand has a QED score < 0.3 from both
training and test sets.
C
Benchmark Construction
This section discusses the ensemble sampling algorithm used for our benchmark evaluations, as
well as specific details on the setup of the mode targeting, mode avoidance and ensemble property
optimisation benchmarks.
C.1
Ensemble Sampling
Ensemble Approximation Since we wish to allow efficient evaluation of molecules generated by
our model, we set up a fast ensemble sampling approach, bypassing the use of CREST [63], which
typically takes hours per small molecule. For each molecule we first sample 128 conformers using
ETKDG [65] (implemented in RDKit), and then run minimisation with the MMFF94 forcefield [66]
for up to 1000 steps. We then deduplicate the conformer set by iterating the list of samples and
remove any with an RMSD within 0.5Å to any previously selected conformer. Finally, we calculate
the MMFF energies for each remaining sample and remove any conformer where the energy difference
to the minimum is more than 6.0 kcal/mol. We found that increasing the number of sampled
conformers to 1024 only marginally changed the estimated values of the observables, so we use 128
conformers to keep the benchmark evaluation tractable.
Approximate Ensemble Properties In practice, for ensemble property estimation, we find this
method of sampling ensembles serves as a reasonable approximation to the underlying CREST
conformers.
We sampled 512 molecules at random from the validation split, sampled their
ETKDG+MMFF ensembles using the above approach, and calculated mean PSA and mean pair-
wise RMSD property values over the CREST and approximated molecular ensembles. Ensembles
29


0
50
100
150
200
250
300
CREST PSA3D
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
ETKDG+MMFF94 PSA3D
PSA3D   r = 0.979   n = 499
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
CREST Mean pairwise RMSD
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
ETKDG+MMFF94 Mean pairwise RMSD
Mean pairwise RMSD   r = 0.776   n = 499
Figure 9: Scatter plots comparing mean PSA (left) and mean pairwise RMSD (right) for ensembles computed
using CREST (x-axis) and our fast ensemble approximation approach (y-axis).
and properties were successfully computed for 499 of the molecules. Scatter plots comparing the
properties of the two ensemble sampling approaches for these molecules are shown in Fig. 9. The
Mean PSA for each molecule is almost identical between the CREST and approximated ensembles,
while the mean pairwise RMSD still shows a strong correlation (Pearson R = 0.78).
C.2
Multi-Mode Conditioning Benchmark
Our mode conditioning benchmark aims to test the model’s ability to condition on multiple modes
of the desired conformational ensemble, while retaining tractable evaluation. For simplicity we
restrict the benchmark to conditioning on two modes, and use shape-only conditioning throughout.
The setup begins by resampling conformer ensembles for each molecule in our test set using the
procedure in Appendix C.1 to ensure the conditioning shapes are accessible for evaluation using
the same procedure. The compact and extended conformers are then taken at the 20th and 80th
percentiles (in order to avoid outliers) of radius of gyration. Pairings are cross-molecule, taking the
compact conformer of one test molecule as the first mode and the extended conformer of another
as the second, so that no single molecule trivially satisfies both. A pairing is only kept if we can
demonstrate that it is achievable. To do this we build a pool of training molecules, sampled evenly
across heavy-atom counts and given the same ensemble treatment, and score each against both
target shapes using its best conformer. For mode targeting, we require at least one training molecule
reaching a shape Tanimoto of 0.8 against both targets. For mode avoidance we require a shape
constraint in both directions; one molecule must match the compact target at 0.8 while staying
below 0.6 against the extended target, and another must do the reverse, so that the pairing remains
achievable whichever mode is negated. We further require any such molecule to have an ECFP
Tanimoto of at most 0.5 to both source molecules, so that a pairing is kept only when it can be
satisfied by chemistry which is distinct from either source and the benchmark cannot be solved by
reproducing a source molecule. These training molecules are used only to establish feasibility during
construction and are never provided to the model. The size-matched baseline for each target is
computed from the same pool, averaging over all molecules within one heavy atom of the reference
with no chemical filter applied.
30


C.3
Evaluation Metrics
This section gives full definitions of the metrics used in Section 4 and Appendix D. Unless stated
otherwise all reported values are means over the benchmark systems, and any metric involving a
reference is computed per system against that system’s reference molecule.
• Validity The proportion of generated molecules which can be sanitised by RDKit and consist
only of a single fragment. We use valid to refer to connected validity throughout, where
molecules that contain disconnected fragments are counted as failures.
• Uniqueness The proportion of distinct canonical SMILES among all generated molecules
which can be converted to SMILES.
• ECFP Tanimoto Tanimoto similarity between the ECFP4 fingerprints (Morgan, radius
2, 2048 bits) of the generated and reference molecules, computed after removing hydrogens.
We use this as a novelty measure, where lower values indicate that the model is not simply
reproducing the reference.
• Shape Tanimoto Gaussian shape overlap between a generated and a reference conformer,
computed using RDKit’s rdShapeAlign. For the multi-mode benchmarks we sample an
MMFF ensemble for each generated molecule (Appendix C.1), align every conformer to the
reference and keep the best scoring one.
• Shape matching gain (∆) The shape Tanimoto of a generated molecule against a target,
minus a size-matched baseline for that target. The baseline is the mean shape Tanimoto over a
random sample of training molecules within one heavy atom of the reference, scored in exactly
the same way. ∆therefore measures the gain over virtual screening molecules of the same size.
• Interaction recovery The proportion of conditioned reference interactions for which the
generated molecule places a pharmacophore of the same type within 2Å. Only the pharma-
cophores given to the model as conditioning are counted, so the metric measures conditioning
fidelity rather than general interaction quality. It is computed on the locally relaxed conformer,
as described in Section 4.2.
• PSA and mean pairwise RMSD The two ensemble properties defined in Section 3.1,
computed over an MMFF ensemble sampled for each generated molecule using the procedure
in Appendix C.1.
• Vina score and Vina min. AutoDock Vina scores for the generated pose in its pocket, in
kcal/mol, using a box centred on the reference ligand with 8Å of padding. Vina evaluates the
pose exactly as generated, while Vina min. evaluates it after local minimisation under the
Vina scoring function. Neither uses redocking, so the generated binding mode is preserved in
both cases.
D
Additional Results
D.1
Size Distribution Learning
Section 3.2 identifies two elements of the training setup as important for learning the correct size
distribution: placing pad atoms at the centre-of-mass (CoM), and applying a permutation alignment
between the padded prior and data molecules. Here we ablate this decision by training models
on GEOM Drugs only, without the pocket encoder, under an otherwise identical training setup.
The first keeps both choices, the second removes the permutation alignment, and the third places
31


Perm-OT +
CoM-padding
No
perm-OT
No
CoM-padding
0
5
10
15
20
25
mean heavy atoms
GEOM Drugs (train), 24.8
22.1
16.3
18.7
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
heavy atoms
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
density
GEOM Drugs (train)
Perm-OT + CoM-padding
No perm-OT
No CoM-padding
Figure 10: Unconditional size distributions for the three training setups, all trained on GEOM Drugs
without the pocket encoder. Left: mean generated size, with the GEOM Drugs training mean marked.
Right: full generated size distributions against the training distribution. Sizes are taken from the model’s
pad token predictions. Error bars are 95% percentile bootstrap intervals over 2000 resamples of the 1000
molecules generated per model.
pad atoms on resampled real atom positions instead of the centre-of-mass. Sampling is identical in
all three cases, since the pad coordinate mode only affects the data molecule during training. We
generate 1000 molecules from each model with all conditioning dropped, and take molecular size
from the model’s own pad token predictions, so that it is defined even where a molecule cannot
be sanitised. Reported intervals are 95% percentile bootstrap intervals over 2000 resamples of the
generated molecules.
We find that the combination of CoM-padding and permutation alignment is crucial for learning the
correct size distribution, although even the combined model does not perfectly match the training set
sizes (Fig. 10). Against a training mean of 24.8 heavy atoms, the combined setup generates a mean
size of 22.1 [21.8, 22.4], removing the permutation alignment gives 16.3 [15.9, 16.6], and removing
centre-of-mass padding gives 18.7 [18.4, 18.9]. Connected validity stays above 0.97 and uniqueness
above 0.99 in every run, so the ablations do not degrade generation in general; they specifically
move the size distribution.
The combined training setup gives pad atoms a single consistent target at the origin, which we
hypothesise provides cleaner training signal. Centre-of-mass padding provides one place for them to
go, and the permutation alignment assigns the prior atoms close to the origin to the pad positions,
so they travel only a short distance along the trajectory. Removing either leaves a noisier signal
for separating pad atoms from real atoms, and the model resolves this by padding more, which
produces smaller molecules. Some undershoot remains with both choices in place, at roughly 2.6
heavy atoms below the training mean. We attribute this to the rarity of fully unconditional samples
during training, which the model sees in around 10% of steps.
D.2
Learning Adaptive Symmetries
Section 3.3 describes adaptive symmetry learning, where the rotated flag tells an encoder whether
its input shares a reference frame with the ligand. Nothing in training constrains the encoder
embeddings themselves, only the behaviour of the model as a whole, so we measure both symmetries
at the output of the generator. We run two experiments, one for invariance and one for equivariance,
testing the generator’s predicted coordinates ˆXθ(., ., ., .). With the flag set, rotating the condition
32


0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
integration time t
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
symmetry error  (% of full frame change)
invariance
Profile (GEOM)
Profile (SPINDR)
Pocket (SPINDR)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
integration time t
equivariance
Figure 11: Symmetry error against integration time, for the profile encoder on GEOM Drugs and SPINDR
ligands and for the pocket encoder on SPINDR pockets. Left: invariance, where the condition is rotated and
the prediction should not move. Right: equivariance, where the state and condition are rotated together
and the prediction should rotate with them. Errors are given as a percentage of the distance the prediction
would have moved had it broken the symmetry instead, which ranges from 2.6 to 5.0Å over the encoders and
snapshots shown. Bands are 95% bootstrap intervals over 64 systems, each averaged over 8 rotations.
alone should leave the prediction unchanged, such that ˆXθ(xt, t, Rm, η) = ˆXθ(xt, t, m, η). With the
flag unset, rotating the state and the condition together should rotate the prediction, such that
ˆXθ(Rxt, t, Rm, η) = R ˆXθ(xt, t, m, η).
States are taken from the model’s own generation trajectory, using constant integration steps so that
snapshots are evenly spaced in t, with each experiment probing a trajectory generated under the flag
it tests. Writing ˆX for the prediction under the unrotated condition and ˆXk for the prediction under
rotation Rk, we measure both RMSD(ˆX, ˆXk) and RMSD(Rk ˆX, ˆXk) over all atom slots. Invariance
requires the first to vanish and equivariance the second, so in each experiment one distance is the
symmetry error while the other gives the scale of a full frame change, and we report the error as
a percentage of the latter. We use 64 systems per encoder with 8 rotations each, averaging both
distances over rotations and then over systems before taking their ratio at each t. We normalise
at each t since the scale of a full frame change grows as the endpoint prediction expands from
a collapsed guess at t = 0 into a full molecule, ranging from 2.6 to 5.0 Å over the encoders and
snapshots shown. Bands are 95% percentile bootstrap intervals over systems.
Both symmetries hold and, crucially, converge towards zero as the generation proceeds (Fig. 11).
Invariance error stays below 6.5% of a full frame change at every point and equivariance below
11%, the largest single value in either experiment being the pocket encoder at t = 0. By t = 0.95
every run is below 1%, with the pocket encoder the most invariant at 0.11%. Atom and bond
distributions follow the same pattern, reaching total variation distances of at most 0.060 and 0.006
and falling below 0.009 and 0.001 by t = 0.95. Invariance error for the profile encoder peaks part
way along the trajectory, at t = 0.20 on SPINDR ligands and t = 0.30 on GEOM Drugs rather than
at t = 0, while the pocket encoder decreases throughout. It is not immediately clear what causes
this pattern and why it is different for different encoders, but we do not attempt to investigate this
further in this work. We do, however, speculate that, for generative models that rely on iterative
denoising, encoding exact symmetries into architectures may be unimportant since the error in
learned symmetries reduces towards zero as the molecule is resolved.
33


Table 2: Multi-mode shape conditioning results for different conditioning setups and values of σshape, all
generated with γ = 4.0. Valid: proportion of molecules which are RDKit sanitisable with no disconnected
fragments; Unique: proportion of unique generated molecules; Tcpt and Text: the mean best-conformer shape
Tanimoto to the compact and extended targets, respectively; ∆cpt, ∆ext: the mean gain over a size-matched
baseline for compact and extended, respectively; and Ref. sim.: mean ECFP tanimoto similarity to the two
reference molecules. All entries are means.
Mode
σ
Valid
Unique
Tcpt
Text
∆cpt
∆ext
Ref. sim.
Mode targeting
Cpt (+, equiv.), Ext (+, inv.) 0.2
0.970
1.000
0.867
0.765
0.188
0.071
0.260
0.5
0.982
1.000
0.768
0.750
0.088
0.056
0.137
Cpt (+, inv.), Ext (+, equiv.) 0.2
0.982
0.992
0.754
0.882
0.074
0.188
0.254
0.5
0.994
1.000
0.741
0.783
0.061
0.089
0.138
Mode avoiding
Cpt (+, equiv.), Ext (-, inv.)
0.2
0.981
1.000
0.890
0.585
0.223
-0.056
0.310
0.5
0.991
1.000
0.769
0.582
0.102
-0.059
0.138
Cpt (-, inv.), Ext (+, equiv.)
0.2
0.974
0.895
0.587
0.905
-0.081
0.264
0.284
0.5
0.985
1.000
0.581
0.786
-0.086
0.144
0.137
D.3
Multi-mode Conditioning
Table 2 provides full results for the mode targeting and mode avoiding benchmarks of Section 4.1,
with one row per conditioning mode and shape noise level. Alongside the shape matching gains
∆plotted in Fig. 4, we report the raw shape Tanimoto achieved against each target, as well as
validity, uniqueness, and similarity to the source molecules. All entries are means over the pairs in
the corresponding benchmark, and ∆is measured against the size-matched baseline described in
Section 4.1. Full definitions of each metric are provided in Appendix C.3.
D.4
Ensemble Property Optimisation
Table 3 gives full results for the property optimisation benchmark of Section 4.2, with all values
reported as means over the benchmark systems. Reference values are computed by passing the
system’s reference ligand through the same evaluation as the generated molecules; its ensemble
properties come from the same MMFF sampling procedure and its Vina scores from the same
in-place scoring and local minimisation. Its validity, interaction recovery and reference similarity
are 1.00 by construction, since the reference is compared against itself, and are shown only for
completeness. Full definitions of each metric are provided in Appendix C.3.
34


Table 3: Property optimisation results, all generated with γ = 2.0 and α = (1), conditioning on the pocket
and reference pharmacophores as a single mode. Valid: proportion of molecules which are RDKit sanitisable
with no disconnected fragments; Ref. sim.: ECFP tanimoto similarity to the reference molecule; Int. rec.:
fraction of reference interactions recovered. Vina and Vina min. are measured in kcal/mol. All results
correspond to the mean value over all benchmark systems.
Conditioning
Valid
Ref. sim.
Int. rec.
Vina
Vina Min.
PSA (Å2)
RMSD (Å)
Pocket + pharma
0.942
0.191
0.954
−6.18
−6.79
167
2.07
+ PSA = 80
0.939
0.164
0.945
−6.17
−6.81
111
2.18
+ PSA = 100
0.935
0.172
0.944
−6.26
−6.87
129
2.16
+ PSA = 120
0.922
0.171
0.954
−6.30
−6.90
144
2.15
+ PSA = 140
0.922
0.172
0.958
−6.31
−6.89
163
2.11
+ RMSD = 1.0
0.952
0.179
0.954
−6.90
−7.39
156
1.69
+ RMSD = 1.5
0.953
0.190
0.961
−6.69
−7.19
159
1.79
+ RMSD = 2.0
0.946
0.186
0.958
−6.48
−7.00
157
1.99
+ RMSD = 2.5
0.935
0.174
0.960
−6.18
−6.83
154
2.17
Reference
1.00
1.00
1.00
−7.74
−7.93
169
1.92
35
